# Introduction

## Ontology CLI

A fully featured command line interface for creating, managing, and interacting with Ontology network nodes.

**Features**:

* Setup a node on the Ontology MainNet, Polaris TestNet, or private TestNet
* Manage the nodes RPC, REST, and WebSocket sub-services
* Configure node parameters such as network gas fee price and transaction limit per block
* Run and manage an Ontology MainNet consensus node
* Account and asset management
* Multi-Signature account creation and transaction signing
* Query block and transaction information
* Smart contract deployment and invocation

## Network environments

Ontology blockchain network consists of both a public live and public test environment. Developers also have the choice of deploying a node in a private test environment.

* **Ontology** \(MainNet\): public live environment
* **Polaris** \(TestNet\): public test environment
* **Private** \(TestNet\): private single node network and test environment

## Ontology nodes

While there are different types of networks, there are different types of nodes as well. Find the list below.

* **Triones node** \| Ontology MainNet 

  * Triones nodes are bookkeeping nodes that participate in the network consensus, and must be voted in by user staking of ONT, after applying to be a consensus node. More information on Ontology consensus can be found [here](https://medium.com/ontologynetwork/triones-node-incentive-model-dbcb175f4728).

* **Synchronization node** \| Ontology MainNet / Polaris TestNet

  * Synchronization nodes do not participate in network consensus, and only synchronizes the blocks generated by the Triones \(bookkeeping\) nodes.

* **Single node** \| Private TestNet 
  * Ontology supports single node network deployment for the development in private test environments.

